Now that you've seen some instruction and code demos on how to create, train and interpret sparse autoencoders
in simulated data and in real data, it is now time for you to do some of the work.
So in this code challenge, we will take a step back in terms of granularity and depth of investigation,
and just focus on the characteristics of the autoencoder results over different layers in a GPT model.
In particular, we are not going to worry about selecting and interpreting a specific component.
Instead, we will explore how the token activation densities change inside the model.
You're also going to directly import some data from Wikipedia, not by copying and pasting as I did
in the previous video, but instead by importing the HTML directly.
I think you're really going to enjoy this code challenge.
So let's begin.
You can start exercise one by importing GPT two small.
We're using the small version of the model to help us develop our code without taking out too much computation
time.
And then at the end of this code challenge, we're going to see whether we can reproduce some of the
results using the large version of the model.
Anyway, worry about that later.
So for now, exercise one.
Import the small version of GPT two.
Next, implant hooks to get activations from the MLP expansion neuron in all of the transformer blocks.
The data that we will use here to train the autoencoder models will come from this Wikipedia page on
LEDs.
Now when you look at a web page rendered in your browser, it looks like this.
You see lots of text links, maybe pictures, and so on.
But behind the scenes, the web page really looks like this.
So this is the HTML source code for this Wikipedia page.
There's a lot going on here, and if you are familiar with HTML then I'm sure you'll recognize lots
of these tags.
If you're not familiar with HTML, then don't worry about it.
That's not important.
What is important is that when you import a website into Python, you do not get the rendered text like
what you see in a browser.
Instead, this is the text that Python imports.
So what I want you to do here is import the entire HTML page for the LED lights from Wikipedia into
Python using the requests library.
That's the same library that we've been using to import books from Gutenberg.org.
Then you can search through the text in Python to find the text.
M-w body content with dashes in between so m-w body content.
There is exactly one character string in this entire file that matches that text.
Exactly, and that is more or less where the text of the Wikipedia page begins.
And you can see that that appears after around a thousand lines of code.
Of course, you're still going to have all of the HTML and CSS tags.
That's totally fine, but this is where you want to begin the text that you will use to train the autoencoder
model.
The next thing to do is search for this tag ID equals references.
Make sure you get the quotes in there.
Now this is the start of the references section on this wiki page.
So the text before my body content and uh, after id equals references that you can completely get rid
of.
And all of the text in between those tags is what you store, what you save, and that's what you will
tokenize and run through the model.
You should find that there are a little over a half million characters in the total web page, and a
little over 160,000 that you will use for training.
Now, to be clear here, I counted the total number of characters.
This is not the number of tokens.
So then you can tokenize the text.
I think there was around 50,000, 52,000 maybe tokens from this 163,000 characters.
Then you can find and print out the 30 most common tokens.
It's probably not that surprising that all of the most common tokens ended up being little bits of HTML
code.
Next, create a batch of ten by 1024, so ten sequences of 1024 tokens.
You can make these non-overlapping sequences from the tokenized wiki text here.
And uh, yeah, you should.
That should cover around 10,000 tokens in total.
That's like 20% of the actual text that we have imported here.
And then the final thing to do for exercise one is run a forward pass and get all of the activations
from the MLP neurons that you have hooked here.
So quite a bit of work for exercise one, but I hope you find this a nice review of working with real
text data from the web.
Okay, so now you should pause the video and get to coding.
And now I will switch to Python.
Here are the libraries that we will use.
And let's see here I'm importing GPT two and pushing it to the GPU.
And let's see.
So it's actually not so necessary to push the language model to the GPU.
We definitely want the auto encoder to be on the GPU.
But since we're using the GPU anyway, we might as well use it for all of the models.
Okay, here I have the function to get the hooks from the MLP layers.
This is nothing new here.
I'm not going to talk about this.
Okay?
Here I'm using the requests library I'm getting from this URL over here.
Here I'm just counting the total number of characters in this text.
And here is where I find the tag m w body content.
And then I set the text to be equal to itself.
But from that index up to the end.
So this is removing the beginning part of the HTML files like the first.
Thousand lines of code or so.
And then here I'm also overwriting the text variable with itself from the beginning up to wherever this
happens to be.
ID equals references.
So you can see I'm just literally throwing out I'm completely overwriting the variable twice.
So we completely lose the information before this tag.
And after this tag.
Totally fine.
Okay.
And then yeah, that's these are the number of characters that we get.
And then here we get 52,000.
I remember it correctly.
I knew it was somewhere around 52,093 tokens from these 160,000 characters.
Okay.
And then this code you've also seen several times earlier in the course.
This is just out of curiosity.
I wanted to see what a lot of these tokens actually looked like.
And by the way, you know, you can also dump out the text of course, and see what that looks like.
So a lot of HTML tags and also a lot of let me open this here.
If you look through this, yeah, you will see some actual text as well.
So the use of turtle safe lighting, LEDs that emit only at narrow portions of the visible spectrum.
ET cetera.
I am I don't need this.
Let me clear all that out.
Okay, so where are we?
We are here.
Okay.
Yeah.
So now I'm just finding the unique tokens.
Returning counts equals true.
And just printing out the top 30.
This is just out of curiosity to see that of these top 30, you know, there's no.
Okay, so there is a but there's no the there probably is a period.
There's a return.
So a new line character.
And yeah a lot of this is just HTML coding stuff.
Okay.
So here I create a batch of tokens.
I'm getting the first 10,000 and 240 tokens and then reshaping that to ten by 1024, pushing it to the
GPU and just confirming the size and then running that through the model.
We don't care about the outputs from the model.
We really just want the MLP activations.
Now for exercise two.
The goal here is to write code to create an auto encoder.
The auto encoder itself is created in a class.
It's specified in a class, and you should write a function that will create a fresh instance of the
autoencoder model.
Now, the reason why you want this in a Python function is that you are going to create and train a
new autoencoder for each layer in the model.
So here you see the function I call it create the sparse autoencoder and it takes one input, which
is the number of units in the latent layer.
So the number of latent components that the model will estimate.
Otherwise, the rest of this class definition is the same as the model that I showed in the code in
the previous video.
Now that means that you could actually solve this part of the code challenge quickly and easily, simply
by copying and pasting from the previous video and then just indenting, you know, just doing a tab
indent to embed it inside a Python function.
However, I do encourage you to challenge yourself a little bit and write at least some of this code
on your own.
One idea, for example, is to have a quick glance through the code from the previous video to give
you a reminder, and then you put that code away, and then you can write this one again As you like.
Anyway, creating this function and this class is the first part of exercise two.
The second part of exercise two is to create an instance of the model, move it to the GPU, run some
tokens through the model just to make sure that everything works and you have no errors.
You can use A2X expansion for the latent layer, which means that there will be around 6000 latent components
that are estimated.
Now, when you push some activations data through the model, you will get two outputs.
That's what you see here.
So this is what I called the instance of this autoencoder model.
Push some data through.
And we got two outputs here in a tuple.
Now this first element here this is the final output of the model.
That's what you use for the loss function.
And after lots of training This should be pretty similar to the input data here.
Now the second output here is this tensor.
Now part of your work for this exercise is making sure that you understand what this tensor is, where
it comes from and why there are lots of zeros in here.
Now, to be clear, you're not always going to get zeros in exactly the same places as what you see
in this screenshot on your screen.
This is a randomly initialized and pre-trained model, so you're not going to see the same numbers here.
But uh, I think you are going to see lots of zeros in your output.
And your goal here is to explain why that is the case where those zeros come from.
Of course, I will discuss this in more detail when I switch to code.
But first you can switch to code and work your way through this exercise.
I am not going to discuss this part of the code.
It's literally the same as in the previous video.
Really, the only difference is that I tab indented it so that it would go inside this function that
I can just call here, but otherwise all the internal workings and so on are the same as in the previous
video.
So I've already explained that you can see at the end of this function I am returning the autoencoder
model.
So I create a fresh instance, push it to the GPU and then send that to the output of the function.
So here is where I'm testing with some data.
Here I create a fresh instance of the model and I input A2X expansion.
This line of code is actually redundant.
I guess I just forgot when I wrote this that I also have this out here.
Anyway, it doesn't matter, you can push the GPU twice.
It's fine.
Okay, so now here we get the two activations.
So what are these two tensors?
The first tensor is, uh, let me see.
So when we call the model, let me go back here.
When I call the model like this, then I'm pushing the data.
This is the MLP activations here.
I'm pushing the data through the model.
So that calls the forward method in the model here.
So we have the input data x we it passes through the encoder and then the non-linear activation function.
And that gives us the activations in the latent layer.
So these are all the latent components that the model is estimating.
I then sparsify them as I explained in the previous video, and give that as the second output.
And then the first output is this variable y, which is the latent code times the transpose of the autoencoder
weights, which is the decoding layer.
Also, as I discussed in the previous video, if you have lots of data and lots of training time, then
you might want this to be its own linear layer.
And then you would push it through self dot decoder instead of multiplying the sparse activations by
the by the decoder by the encoder transpose.
Okay.
So the second output of the forward method is the sparse latent activation.
And that is this over here.
So now the question is why are there so many zeros here.
Because it's been sparsified.
All of the largest activations are preserved.
Those are passed through their untouched.
And all of the weaker activations and the activations end up getting zeroed out.
That is imposed by the sparsity constraint.
I'm sure that after doing all of this preparatory work.
You are very excited to actually do some analyses and train these models.
Lucky for you, that is exactly the goal of exercise three.
So here you see a big four loop over all of the layers or transformer blocks.
So start by grabbing the activations from this layer and make sure that they are of size tokens by MLP
neurons.
Or here I call it hidden.
Now also, as you know from lots of previous videos, the very first token in a sequence is often weird.
It can elicit an unusual and extreme or outlier set of activations.
So here you also want to remove the first token.
And that means that this the size of x here is going to be 219 instead of 220.
Yeah.
Because you're going to exclude the very first token.
Next, create a fresh instance of an untrained random model.
So randomly initialized untrained model.
And then you're ready to actually train the model.
So you do the forward pass.
You do back prop I don't specify here in this screenshot how many epochs to train.
I used 75 in the solutions file.
Now in the previous video we used 100, but there we trained only one layer.
Here we're going to train all of the layers.
So I think it's a good idea to reduce the number of training epochs a little bit just to save some some
computation time.
Anyway, after you do all of the training, you can grab and store the final loss.
So just the loss from the very last training epoch and store that for each layer.
This is something that we will visualize in the next exercise.
And then you can do one more run with the same data to get the final latent activations.
We don't care about this final output.
We want the latent activations from the, uh, the fully trained model.
Remember that we are running everything on the GPU, so we're training on the GPU.
So you will certainly need to bring the activations back to the CPU.
As you might remember from previous videos, I personally find numpy to be a little bit more comfortable
and familiar for data analysis compared to PyTorch.
So I also converted these back to numpy, the activations back to numpy.
But if you want to leave them in PyTorch, then that's also great.
All of the subsequent analyses can certainly be done in PyTorch as well.
Okay.
And then the rest of this code is just some analyses to perform.
So here I calculate the density per Component, that is, the percent of non-zero activations for each
latent component.
Now keep in mind that this is actually a matrix here.
And we have 6000 components and 219 or whatever tokens.
But here I'm only storing one value of the density per layer.
So per transformer block.
So I will let you think about how you want to deal with that.
Of course I'll show what I did.
But my solution is not the only correct approach to take.
So if you want to do something else, that's fine.
The important thing is that at the end of this for loop over all the layers, we want to have some estimate
of the density of the components from each layer.
And yeah, of course, if you prefer to think about sparsity instead of density, you can also turn
this analysis around and store sparsity.
Totally fine.
Okay, the next piece of information that we want to store over all the layers is the average activation
magnitudes from the non-zero activations.
Again, I have one way of solving this.
You can come up with a different way.
It's totally fine.
You can also just copy and modify code from the previous video.
And then finally I also calculated this measure of density by activation, which is a product of the
density as a percentage and the activation as the numerical value of the activation.
And you can see that also here, which is different from what I did in the previous video.
Here, I min max scaled these two measures before combining them to make sure that they are on the same
numerical scale.
Okay, so this for loop is all of the analyses that we are doing in this code challenge.
Once you have all of this set up on the GPU, this should take around three minutes or so for a GPT
two small.
So therefore, if you like, you could add some lines of code at the bottom of this for loop to track
the progress.
For example by printing a message at the end of each layer.
Calculation.
Maybe you want to import the Tqdm library to have a progress bar updating up here.
Anyway, I hope you enjoy working through this exercise.
And now I will switch to code and show my solution.
Here is where I initialize the variables that I will use to store the results for each layer.
Loop over 75 epochs.
Uh, here I am, looping over all of the layers, grabbing the hidden activations from the MLP neurons.
And let me see.
Here is where I'm ignoring the first token.
So all of the batches, all of the neurons, all the activations and only from token one through the
end.
Again, that's just because the first token in any sequence tends to elicit a weird and rather extreme
pattern of activations.
So in this case, I just chose to ignore it completely by not even putting it into the analysis in the
first place.
Okay, so then yeah, here we need a fresh instance of the model.
Again, this line is redundant.
I suspect what happened is I had this and then after writing all the code, I decided it would be better
to put it here.
And I forgot to delete these other lines.
Anyway, it doesn't matter.
Okay, so then, because for each layer, we need a new instance of the model.
That means we also need to re-initialize the optimizer and re-initialize the loss function.
And of course that has to go to the GPU as well.
Forward pass and backprop.
Pretty straightforward stuff.
It looks like here I am using the, uh, the main loss function and the L1 loss and not the decorrelation
loss.
To be honest, uh, I wrote this code a little while ago, and I don't remember if there was a very
specific reason for me leaving out the decorrelation loss.
Uh, but it's fine.
You can put it in if you like, or leave it out.
We're actually not going to interpret any of the components in this code challenge, so I think it's
fine if the components are a little bit more correlated than they otherwise would be.
Okay.
So now here, uh, the for loop over all of the training is finished.
And now here is where I grab the final loss.
So this is going to give me an estimate of how well the autoencoder was able to match the final output
to the original input, which are the, uh, token activations from MLP.
Okay.
And then the final run to get the latent activations from the trained model, bring it back to the CPU
and convert it into NumPy from PyTorch.
And then all of this code you have seen exactly from the previous video.
I didn't really change this at all.
And that means that this variable here is a vector with one element for each of the latent components.
And then in the previous video, you know, we were sorting this and generating the text heat map based
on values of density.
Here I'm just averaging over all of the components to get one really aggregated measure of density and
storing that as this variable here, which is going to have one value per layer.
So yeah, I'm really aggregating over a lot of information in this code challenge in this exercise.
Okay.
Again, this is also the same thing that you have seen in the previous video and then, uh, yeah,
here I am calculating this product of the density by the non-zero activations and that I store for this
particular layer, this part you have seen in the previous video.
And what I changed here was this min max scaling.
Basically, I wanted to explore whether we would get more interesting, more interpretable results if
the two measures were on exactly the same numerical scale.
And so that's why I min max scaled them.
Okay.
And then I just print out here.
So here we see this finished layer one through 12.
And yeah for GPT two small this whole thing takes 2 to 3 minutes.
Now for exercise four you don't need to do any new analyses here.
You're just going to write code to visualize the three key analyses that you stored per layer from the
previous exercise.
So over here we have the final loss from the autoencoder model per layer.
And that will tell you basically how easy it was for the autoencoder model to reconstruct the activations.
The lower the loss the better the reconstruction, which also means the less complex the representations
are overall.
Here in the middle panel we have the density per layer as percent of non-zero activations.
As I mentioned in the in the instructions for exercise three, if you chose to set up the analyses in
a slightly different way, obviously you might have slightly different graphs, different y axes, and
that's great.
The important thing is that however you set up the analysis, it should be implemented exactly identically
for each layer.
So that will allow you to interpret the changes over the different layers you don't want to have, you
know, different analyses or different parameters for the different layers.
All that should be fixed anyway.
Finally, over here we have this density by activation normalized score.
So that's it for exercise four.
Not much coding.
Maybe just having some fun with matplotlib and seeing what you make of the results.
And now I will switch to code and discuss some of these plots.
Really not much to the code here.
I'm just plotting the final loss, the latent density and the density by activations scores.
So what we see here, I think that most important and most interesting result is that there is a roughly
monotonic, roughly linear increase in the density per layer.
So as we get deeper into the model, further away from the initial token embeddings and towards the
prediction for the next token, And then we see the density gets higher.
So the model is just having activations to more and more tokens.
And that's probably due to the model needing to incorporate information across a broader context.
So it really needs to activate a larger number of words in order to make a valid and useful prediction
of the next token.
This is the final exercise in this code challenge.
The good news is that it will take you extremely little time to write the code for this exercise.
But the bad news is that it will take a relatively long time to actually run this exercise.
All I want you to do is rerun the entire code file from scratch from the top, and you just make one
tiny change, which is to replace the GPT two small model with GPT two large.
So just the large version of the same model.
And then you can watch 40 TikTok videos.
And why should you watch 40 TikToks?
Because apparently TikTok users watch two videos per minute on average.
According to ChatGPT.
So running through the code with the large version of this model takes approximately 20 minutes on the
GPU in that for loop over the different layers.
Of course, that time can vary depending on the sizes that you specify for the latent components.
And of course on the number of training iterations.
Now the goal here is not just to have some excuse to watch TikToks.
The goal is to make sure that, first of all, the code still works without any errors, even though
all of the sizes will differ.
And secondly, to check whether the three plots at the end so from exercise four are qualitatively similar
for the small and the large versions of this model.
I hope you enjoy watching your TikToks or whatever else you do while waiting for the analysis to run.
These three panels up here.
So this figure up here, this is from exercise four.
That was from the small version of GPT two.
And here this screenshot here is from the large version.
Remember that has 36 layers.
Okay so I have a couple of remarks to make.
One is that this density by activation metric turns out to be not terribly insightful or interesting.
It doesn't seem to do a whole lot that we can make sense out of, either for the GPT two small version
or for the large version.
So, you know, always good to explore different ways of analyzing and characterizing data.
But if you really don't see any interesting changes, then you might want to just drop that measure,
okay.
And then what's really interesting and highly consistent across the two different models is the increase
in density.
Or you could alternatively say the decrease in sparsity of the activations across all the layers.
So as we get deeper into the model, that was already quite apparent in the small version and super
clear, this is a really, really crisp finding in the large version of this model.
Even this kind of plateau shape feature here maybe is consistent over here, although it's tricky to
overinterpret a subtle feature like that with only 12 data points up here.
Also pretty interesting to see that the final loss was lowest for these middle layers where there wasn't
really this change.
So it seems like around here is where there's some shift in the regime of the MLP calculations in the
transformer blocks between lower density regimes and higher density regimes.
And somewhere here in the middle, this is where actually the activation patterns were less complex
because they were easier for a autoencoder model to match.
That's basically what this score indicates.
Lower numbers here means that the model had an easier time reconstructing the activation patterns.
Of course, we didn't do any in-depth or fine grained analyses in this code challenge.
An interesting feature of complex systems is that you cannot understand them purely from coarse grained
and abstracted analyses, like what we did in this code challenge.
Nor can you understand them completely by just doing extremely detailed, fine grained investigations
in actual research.
It is useful to be able to see both the forest and the trees, so you can understand the large scale
patterns.
And then you can try to investigate some of the fine grained details.
I think the most fruitful approaches are going to come from trying to analyze model characteristics
and dynamics at multiple spatial scales, so small scales and large scales.
Zooming in to, you know, individual MLP neurons and maybe small circuits of a collection or a little
ensemble of neurons, and then zooming out and seeing how that relates to dynamics happening one layer
at a time.
In other words, looking at the data at multiple scales and seeing how the different scales interact
with each other.
So multi-scale investigations.
All that said, in general, what we did see is that the activation density increases as we go deeper
into the model.
And that characteristic seems pretty consistent across the two versions of GPT two.